---
layout: page
title: CV
permalink: /cv/
---

## Experience

#### Thread - Software Engineer, June 2014 - Present

As part of a product-focused engineering team at Thread, much of my role
involves projects designed to address key business metrics such as margin,
conversion or revenue growth, although a core part of my job is to help create
a great engineering culture in which to work.

I'm frequently involved in the rapid development of new product features
designed to address user feedback, and work closely with designers, stylists,
copy-writers, and marketers to achieve this. I also work on pure engineering
projects, such as our build processes, automation, and continuous delivery to
help the team work faster and more effectively. I take part in code review on a
regular basis, pair programming where appropriate, and participate in hiring
for new engineers.

#### MWR InfoSecurity - Security Research and Development Intern, Summer 2013

At MWR I was given the task of taking a new security product from idea to a
fully featured prototype. At the end of my internship I onboarded another
developer to the codebase so that development could continue. Eventually the
project was spun-off into a new company – Countercept.

During my time at MWR I also participated in a penetration test against a
client's iOS application, finding vulnerabilities and verifying the client's
fixes in a code review, and I assisted on an incident response job where I
analysed a piece of malware to reverse engineer the cryptography being used by
it. I also learnt about some of the current threats to businesses, particularly
Advanced Persistent Threats, and different forms of attack that have been
identified.

#### GoSquared - Software Developer, Summer 2012

At GoSquared I spent 4 months working on re-engineering the backend services
that handle incoming web analytics data, making use of Node.js, Redis,
Cassandra and more. I investigated the use of Amazon Elastic Map Reduce and
competing products, and helped to set up the continuous integration and
deployment systems used in the company.

#### Realmac Software - Software Developer Intern, Summer 2011

At Realmac Software I worked on improving an existing app, Courier, contributed
to in-house frameworks that were shared between several applications, and
helped put the finishing touches on Analog (since sold to Appuous) prior to its
release at the end of my internship. Through code review and mentoring, I
learnt a lot about the structure of larger applications, dealing with web
services and APIs, and about making very high quality, user-experience focused
apps.

## Qualifications

 - **MEng Computer Science with Mobile and Secure Systems**
   at the University of Southampton (2010-2014)
   - Programming Principles: 92%
   - Secure Systems: 82%
   - Winner of 3rd Year Netcraft Prize
 - **A-Levels**: Maths A, Physics A, Computing A*, Economics (AS) A

## Events

I make an effort to attend industry events, as I find them a great way of
learning new skills, finding alternate points of view, and getting critical
feedback on ideas. Events I've been to include
[Many to Many](http://www.manytomany.co.uk),
[Hackunamatata](http://hackunamatata.nl/), National Hack the Government
(multiple years), [NSConference](http://nsconference.com/), Southampton
Appathon, [Random Hack of Kindness](http://www.rhok.org/event/southampton-uk)
(multiple times),
[Rewired State: Parliament](http://rewiredstate.org/hacks/parliament-2012),
Barcamp Brighton and Barcamp Southampton. I have won multiple hackathons (with
some help from friends!).

I have also presented at PyConUK and the London Django Meetup Group.

 - [Scaling Django Codebases – PyConUK 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jBBcORHhfV0)
 - [Managing Special Cases with Django Enumfield – London Django Meetup 2018](https://skillsmatter.com/skillscasts/11718-django-enumfield)

## Skills

##### Technical

 - Currently using Python, Django, Elm, Javascript, React and Git
 - Experience using Postgres and Redis in production
 - Previously worked on Objective-C, C# .NET MVC and Node.js codebases on professional projects
 - Some experience with Haskell for personal projects
 - Used Java, C and Io in university projects
 - Knowledge of, and interest in, computer security issues.
 - Basic knowledge, and interest in penetration testing and malware analysis.
 - Experience with good software design practices.

##### Non-Technical

 - Extensive experience with code review.
 - Strong emphasis on empathy, candour and clarity in communication.
 - Experience with project management tools, bug tracking and testing feedback.
 - Excellent written and spoken communication.
 - Experience working in an environment with constant re-prioritisation of work.
 - Always learning.
