---
title: "Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room"
date: 2020-01-14
theme: enron
---

I've been reading this extensive breakdown [by Bethany McLean and Peter
Elkind][enron-link] of Enron's collapse after a colleague's recommendation
(based on my enjoyment reading [Bad Blood][bad-blood-link]). I found it
fascinating how much of the classic image I have of corporate greed stems from
the relatively recent collapse of Enron in 2001. Since I just missed the Enron
collapse, being about ten years old at the time, I had assumed that these ideas
had existed for much longer, but during the bull market of the 90s the image had
yet to fully form.

There is too much detail in the book to summarise everything I've learned from
it, but I wanted to pull out two specific pieces that will be front of mind for
me for a long time to come. I've simplified some of the details here partially
because there's too much in the book to include here, and partially because I'm
not familiar enough with the financial concepts to talk about them confidently.
Apologies for any mistakes, but I hope the points still remain.

### Mark to market accounting

Something that stood out to me when watching [the film][enron-film-link] before
I read the book, was the use of mark-to-market accounting. This is where assets
and liabilities are valued according to the current market price, rather than
the price paid or value they have provided.

The example given with Enron was that when closing a deal they would book the
entire value of the deal on the balance sheet at the time of signing. For
example, if selling a contract to provide energy, worth $1m revenue a year for
20 years, they would book revenue of $20m at the time of signing. Traditionally
this would have been booked as \$1m each year of the contract. This practice
looked great at first glance as Enron was booking significant revenues, and
could show huge growth, something the market loved, and their share price grew
accordingly.

When watching the film I had thought this whole practice sounded ridiculous,
_well obviously they must be a fraud_ I had thought. However the book goes into
more detail.

Imagine a hedge fund. When buying a stake in a company for $20m, that _is worth_
$20m at the time of buying. Recording it on the balance sheet as such is an
accurate way to document the value owned by the hedge fund. If the share price
goes up by 10%, the hedge fund could book revenue of another $2m, because the
value of their stake is now worth $22m. The flip side is that if the share price
drops by 10%, they should book a loss of $2m as their stake is now only worth
$18m.

This is fairly intuitive and easy to understand, and (roughly) that's
mark-to-market accounting. This is in fact so well understood that it's
considered a normal part of the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)
in the US, a common set of practices for how to document accounting for
investors, auditors, or the public.

Now imagine that this hedge fund traded energy futures instead of shares, and
that we're in the mid 90s so there isn't a market for energy futures yet, and
the hedge fund is trying to start a market for them. This isn't much of a leap,
and is where Enron found themselves. While they started out as strictly an
energy company, owning gas pipelines and production facilities, they wanted to
transform into a "gas bank" – creating a market for natural gas contracts that
could be traded, to hedge and securitise energy services. This was so critical
to Jeff Skilling's vision for Enron when he joined, that he negotiated his
employment contract to include a requirement for Enron to move to mark-to-market
accounting so that they could work more like a financial institution than a
traditional energy company.

Before reading the book, I hadn't appreciated how close to reasonable the choice
of mark-to-market accounting was. In many ways it really did make sense,
especially since Enron was creating something new.

Unfortunately for Enron (and their accountants Arthur Anderson) with hindsight
it wasn't the right choice. Mark-to-market accounting works for shares and might
be fine for energy futures, but much of Enron's business was still traditional
energy supply contracts where the practice didn't make sense. Also
mark-to-market requires the ongoing updating of the value of assets and
liabilities over time, based on an accurate understanding of value. In many
cases, Enron did not update their balance sheet with the new values of their
contracts, and even when they did this was typically done with optimistic models
and forecasts created internally with no oversight, rather a stock market value
that a hedge fund would typically use.

This theme of Enron's innovation being mostly reasonable on the surface
continues throughout the book, however one of the main reason's for their
downfall was Enron's culture of legality being equated to ethics – if it's
legal, it's _right_. Ultimately Enron did a lot that was illegal, but much of
their fate was sealed with legal actions (and those that weren't sufficiently
challenged by their risk team, accountants, or the SEC), that they believed were
right to do.

There are many parallels with the present-day themes of _disruption_ in
Silicon Valley and the tech startup ecosystem, but in place of financial
engineering we see privacy/targeting and exploitation of workers. While the
outcomes might be even worse this time around, Enron's downfall was due to their
financial engineering over-leveraging their share price, so if we see collapses
of companies like Facebook or Amazon, it's likely to be in a very different way.

### Culture

The second thing that stood out to me while reading the book was how, in their
final months and days, Enron and their senior staff doubled down on their
errors, further leveraging themselves, exacerbating their collapse.

The main example of this is how Enron CFO Andy Fastow created multiple funds
(each larger than the one before) that lent to Enron, with investment repayments
guaranteed by Enron. Not only did Enron guarantee to repay the loans immediately
should their credit rating be downgraded, but they were also guaranteed by Enron
shares, meaning if the share price fell to far, it would cost Enron far more
shares to repay them. The worst part was that these two mechanisms – share price
and credit rating – are tied together such that should one go bad, it would be
very likely that the other one would as well.

This all happened because of a culture that Enron executives may have called
optimistic, but that many would have called arrogant. Arthur Anderson
accountants on the Enron account, and clients who bought from Enron, both spoke
to this culture of arrogance – a feeling that Enron employees were better than
everyone else.

It seems that much of this arrogance came from Skilling, who had previously been
a partner at the management consultancy McKinsey & Company. McKinsey already
have a reputation for elitism, and arguably arrogance (although in my limited
experience they do seem good at what they do), so combined with Skilling's own
meteoric rise through their ranks, it's not surprising that this was amplified
at Enron.

It's also not surprising in hindsight that Skilling's own sense of self-worth
became entangled with Enron's share price to the point where he ultimately left
due to its decline and then attempted to re-join as he realised that the decline
may not have been his doing after all (it definitely was).

For me, the most egregious example of the arrogance in Enron's culture came from
CEO Ken Lay, who had much of his extensive personal wealth tied to Enron. So
much of his wealth was tied to it that his financial advisors encouraged him to
diversify, but rather than selling Enron shares and putting the money into other
investments he took out loans for investments that were secured against the
value of his Enron shares. This leverage was yet another dangerous link to a
share price based on overly optimistic numbers, and another example of a
cultural belief that Enron was special and could not fail.

Ultimately, one of the messages I ended up taking away from the book was that
not only was Enron's culture a toxic and unpleasant one that reduced their
effectiveness as a company, but the arrogance in their culture and approach
being the best way to do things led to them doubling down on their worst aspects
during their toughest times.

---

For anyone interested in or working in finance, I'd recommend [_Enron: The Smartest
Guys in the Room_][enron-link] as a detailed study in how not to operate, and
common ethical pitfalls to avoid. For anyone interested in company culture and
how it affects performance, it's a fascinating read, documenting one of the
clearest examples of that connection that I've seen.

[enron-link]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B00D8Q0DL4/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=danpalmer07-21&creative=6738&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B00D8Q0DL4&linkId=86e577725748cd8ea38a3dd9e86005df
[bad-blood-link]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1509868089/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=danpalmer07-21&creative=6738&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=1509868089&linkId=ea88b9577e8417cdb6d80c4f203db6ab
[enron-film-link]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B00ET1RB6C/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=danpalmer07-21&creative=6738&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B00ET1RB6C&linkId=6816c5aa0e31aaddc32d15466f1bc0df
